We would have a conversation with founders and you're saying like, gosh, I'm almost embarrassed to ask this question
but who exactly is your target customer? And three co-founders have three different answers.
After these hundreds of teams that we've worked with, we've seen that there's one failure mode which is
they don't know what that set of basics are. Then there's this other failure mode where they never test it.
Let's talk about the foundation sprint. Walk us through the process. How does it start? What are the steps?
The very beginning of your project. We recommend this kind of crazy idea that you clear your calendar.
So the core team come together for 10 hours roughly and go through a sequence of activities so that we
can make all of the key decisions together. I think a lot of people wonder is they're hearing this is,
why don't I just build something and launch it and learn? One phenomenon we've seen when teams are
building things really quickly with AI is that the more AI generated or assisted they are, the more
generic they tend to turn out with yourself in a situation where you can slow down and do some hard
thinking, some deep thinking about what's actually going to make your product unique, going fast
can actually slow you down in the long run. Today my guest are Jake Nap and John Ziratsky. The
framework that Jake and John share in this conversation is basically the missing manual for
founders and product teams trying to refine and test their startup or product idea. It's called
the foundation sprint and it emerged out of the famous design sprint which Jake and Jay-Z co-created
and also for working with over 300 teams building both new product and startups.
Also with teams of larger companies like Google, Microsoft, YouTube, Slack, Uber and many more,
they published a book with this framework at the beginning of this year called Click
and the excerpt from that book that dives into this framework is one of my most popular
post of all time and was one of the rare non-AI posts amongst the top post rankings.
In this conversation make sure to get your pencils out because we go through exactly how to
execute this two-day sprint where at the end of it you have a very clear hypothesis that your
entire team is aligned around that clarifies what you're building, who you're building for,
how different shades from competitors and how to quickly test it with real potential customers.
The two days that you invest in a sprint might be the highest ROI days in the history of your product
and I highly encourage you to do this if you're in the process of baking an idea.
If you enjoyed this podcast don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite
podcasting app or YouTube. Also if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter you get a year
free of a bunch of amazing products including Bolt, linear, superhuman notion, perplexity,
granola and more check it out Lenny's newsletter.com and click bundle. With that I bring you Jake,
NAP and John Ziratsky. This episode is brought to you by Brex. The financial stack used by one in
every three US venture back startups. Brex knows the nearly 40% of startups fail because they run
out of cash so they build a banking experience that focuses on helping founders get more from every
dollar. It's a stark difference from traditional banking options that leave a startups cash sitting
idle while chipping away at it with fees. To help founders protect cash and extend runway,
Brex combined the best things about checking, Treasury and FDIC insurance in one powerhouse account.
You can send and receive money worldwide at lightning speed. You can get 20x the standard FDIC
protection through program banks and you can earn industry leading yield from your first dollar
while still being able to access your funds any time. To learn more, check out Brex at brex.com
slash banking dash solutions. That's BREX.com slash banking solutions.
Many of you are building AI products which is why I'm very excited to chat with Brandon Foo
founder and CEO of Paragon. Hey Brandon. Hey Lenny, thanks for having me. So integrations
have become a big deal for AI products. Why is that? Integrations are mission critical for AI
for two reasons. First, AI products need context from the customer's business data such as
Google Drive files, Slack messages or CRM records. Seconds, for AI products to automate work on
behalf of users, AI agents need to be able to take action across these different third-party tools.
So we're just Paragon fittings all this. Well these integrations are a pains of build and that's
why Paragon provides an embedded platform that enables engineers to ship these product integrations
in just days instead of months across every use case from rag data ingestion to agentic actions.
And I know from firsthand experience that maintenance is even harder than just building it for the
first time. Exactly. We believe product teams should focus engineering efforts in competitive
advantages, not integrations. That's why companies like U.com, AI21 and hundreds of others use
Paragon to accelerate their integration strategy. If you want to avoid wasting months of engineering
on integrations that your customers need, check out Paragon at useparagon.com slash Lenny.
Jake and Jay-Z, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.
Hey Lenny, thanks for having us. Yeah, thanks so much for having us on again. This is always a treat.
This is going to be a very tactical conversation. We're going to be going through how to actually
execute a foundation sprint. And the reason that I'm excited to do this is you guys shared an excerpt
from your book where you initially shared this whole concept. It's called Click. You shared this
in my newsletter and I was just looking at it and that excerpt that post is amongst the top 10,
most popular post of all time in my newsletter, which is especially special because it's not an AI
oriented background. It's one of the few non AI posts that are near the top 10, which just tells
me how valuable this is to people and consistently it has sat there. It hasn't been usurped. It just
continues to climb. So I'm really excited to just have a conversation where we shared actually
how to do this. Let me just start with the beginning. Just a little backstory on how the foundation
sprint came to be. I know it emerged out of the now very famous design sprint, which you guys also
developed. So just give us a very brief overview of just how this came to be, this idea of this
foundation sprint. Well, maybe I'll start by talking about the design sprint part because it is
essential to understanding the foundation sprint. And the design sprint first developed, I had been
working at the beginning of my career at Microsoft for a few years, went to Google, which is like 2007,
2008, 2009. And working on the Gmail team was working on some projects that were just executing
well, delivering shipping. But I had this other project, this side project that had been going on
for three years with a couple of colleagues was going nowhere. And it looked like their office
was going to get shut down after the financial crisis. They were in Stockholm. I went there for a
week. We cleared our calendars for a week. And we created a prototype of this thing because we
decided, look, we're never going to get anywhere. We've tried making the perfect pitch. We've tried
to, you know, make the ideal PRD. We've tried to show the ideal design. And we just, we can't,
perfection is not working. We're not able to align people. We're not able to get sort of executive
support for this thing. We couldn't convince Larry and Sergey and Eric that they should fund this
thing. And in that week in Stockholm, we created a prototype instead. We decided, you know what,
forget it, we're just going to build something and put it in people's hands, put it in our fellow
Googlers hands. And that prototype was what became Google Meet. It was this video conferencing
tool that you could use in the web browser. Yeah, it was really cool. I mean, the outcome of that,
that's definitely probably the most productive week I've ever had. But the thing that struck me
at the time and in hindsight was, wow, it was so different to clear the calendar for a week
and have the entire focal point of every person on the team be, how do we create a prototype that's
so real, that works so well, that people will think it's real, that they'll react like it's real,
that they'll want it. And we were in survival mode, you know, we were trying to keep that office
from getting shut down. But the, the notion that maybe you could repeat that and recreate that
is what led me to create the design sprint. So for a couple of years at Google, I start running
these one week programs with teams trying to go at the beginning of a project from, you know,
zero to a prototype at the end that we can, that we can sort of evaluate tests. And then I went
to go work at Google Ventures. So separate one of the alphabet companies were investing in startups.
I mean, John Ziratsky, and we start running these design sprints with, well, it turned out to be
over the course of five years. I don't know, a couple hundred teams working in the early days
with founders, the early days of their establishing the product for the first time, trying to build it
from zero to one or launching a new marketing campaign, a new ad campaign, some big high risk
endeavor. We'd get to work alongside them for a week and we ended up refining this process into
a recipe. So across five days, it's map, sketch, decide prototype and test. One big focal point
for each day. So at the end of the week, you've got a tested prototype and you learn like, are we
on the right track or not? And that's the design sprint. That's kind of the, you know, the prologue,
the backstory to this thing. And then after a few years at Google Ventures, John and I left and
eventually, together with our co-founder, Eli Blie Goldman, we started our own venture firm,
Character Capital. And that's kind of where the story of the foundation sprint comes in.
Okay, awesome. Jay-Z, anything you wanted to add?
One of our goals, probably our biggest goal for starting our own VC firm was that we wanted to
be able to focus on just the kinds of companies and the stage of company building that was the
most fun to us, but also was where we thought we could have the biggest impact. And so, you know,
for us with our background as designers, that is the early days, the first couple of months or
the first year or two years of building a new business. And at GV, you know, sometimes we did
that. Sometimes we were working with companies that were already well established. And when we'd come
into those companies, they kind of knew what they were doing. They knew what they stood for. They
knew how they were different in the market and how they were positioned. And so we could help them,
answer these big questions and solve these problems and test their prototypes with customers. But
when we started investing in truly pre-seed, sometimes inception stage, pre-product, pre-revenue,
pre-everything companies, there was this piece missing at the beginning of that process.
So we'd run design sprints and they would be helpful. But oftentimes it felt like there was
there was a foundational element of that project that we didn't quite have our hands around.
And it was things like, what is the problem you're solving and who's the ideal customer?
How are you different than what's in the market today? Who are your actual competitors?
And there were these questions that just kept coming up again and again that led us to say,
hey, we need to create a new sprint method, something that is really targeted for the very
beginning of these big new projects. And so that was what led us to create the foundation sprints
at character capital in 2021-2022.
Okay, yeah, I was wondering the timeline on this. What I love about stuff like this,
like episodes like this, is you guys have done so much work and done this so many times with so
many companies, so many founders, and have learned what works and doesn't work. You said hundreds
of founders, hundreds of startups. And you've just spent so many hours studying this, refining it,
crafting it. And now you're just here to share all the answers, save us so much time, just like the
ROI on this is incredible for us. So I appreciate you guys doing this. Let's get into it. Let's talk
about the foundation sprint. Walk us through the process. How does it start? What are the steps?
So specifically what we talk about with the foundation sprint is it's the very beginning of your
project. We recommend this kind of crazy idea that you clear your schedule, you clear your calendar.
So the core team, this is the co-founders if it's a startup. If it's a product team inside a
larger organization, it's the whoever's in charge of product, it's whoever's in charge of
engineering, it's whoever's in charge of design, it's whoever's in charge of marketing, the core
leadership team, they're going to come together for it's going to be 10 hours roughly give or take.
And during those 10 hours, we're going to go through a sequence of activities, very highly scripted
sequence of activities so that we can make all of the key decisions together and identify the
basics of the project, what's going to differentiate us in the marketplace and what's the best approach
or implementation path. All of those together form a hypothesis and then we recommend. So you finish,
now that's your foundation sprint, you've got your founding hypothesis. Once you've got that
founding hypothesis, then you're going to go and do design sprints and we recommend you clear the
calendar for two to three weeks at least. So you have the chance to be wrong about your hypothesis
and we're going to run experiments. And again, the design sprint highly scripted,
calendar clear, you know, emails off, we're just, the slack is off, we're just focused on
running through these sequence of decisions, building prototypes, getting them in front of customers,
learning about a scorecard that relates back to the founding hypothesis. So at the big picture,
it's it's going to be anywhere from 10 hours to, you know, three to four weeks. You're going to run
this detailed script of activities with your team, with their calendars clear and that's crazy.
And most people won't do it. But if you do it, it confers upon you a huge advantage. Because now,
you're, you've got information, you know whether or not your product clicks with customers. And
that's a, we've seen that be just such a tremendous signal for, is there going to be product market fit?
Okay, that was really helpful. The 10 hours is that specifically, that's the foundation sprint,
time box, that's the foundation sprint. Okay, box, yeah. And it's, it's give or take, right? You might,
you might go fast and be done in eight, you might have a lot of conversations and have a slightly
larger team and might take you 12. So we like to spread it out over two days due to, you know, like
four to six hour blocks. Okay. And then the three to four weeks ish, that's including the design
sprint. That's the design sprint. Yeah. Okay. When we also print. Okay, this is incredible ROI on
10 hours of work. Basically over two days, you get to have a much stronger sense of whether your idea
is any good. And you can, yeah, that is that a simple way to describe it, like the just supercharge
validating an idea. Exactly. Yeah, it's, it's a, it's a chance to, in the, in the 10 hours,
it's a chance to get clarity about the core of your strategy, which is something that teams will
often go months without really nailing down. And the, the three to four weeks, that's a chance to
run experiments and get confidence, you're, you're actually building the right thing. Okay,
let's talk about these two days. How does, how do you lay it out? How do you approach it? What
should someone do if they want to actually try this? I don't. So there are three phases to the
foundation sprint. First phase is the basics. Second phase is differentiation. And the third phase is
the approach to the project. So again, all three of those are going to come together to create
the founding hypothesis. So the first phase, the basics, as I mentioned, that's identifying
who's your customer, what problem are you solving for the customer? What's the competition for
solving that problem? How do they solve it today? And what are the alternatives? How, how else do
people solve this? What are the workarounds? Those are really almost embarrassingly simple things to
answer. But when we do this with a team and everybody's answering, you know, so we're proposing
their answer to each question we see, everybody's got a different perspective. And then when we walk
in, the decision maker on the team says, okay, it's going to be this one, it's going to be this one,
it's going to be this one. Now we have clarity and, and confidence that that's the right way to go.
So we'll move forward from the basics into differentiation and identify what are the things that
can set us apart from those competitors. And we're going to use the advantages we have. We're
going to use our, our insight. We're going to use our motivation. We're going to use our special
capabilities. These are things, again, people are aware of these things. They're in tune to it,
but we want to get super, super specific. And I'll, we'll go into an example in a second,
and I think that'll make it more clear exactly what we mean. But going then from differentiation
to staying, what are all of the different implementation paths we could take here? What's
identify what those are? Put a little detail behind them. And then we have a structured path for
people to take so they can weigh that decision, but move through really quickly, commit to one,
have a backup plan. In case you end up feeling like you need to pivot once you start sprinting on it.
And all of that together is going to form this, this kind of mad lives sentence. If we solve this
problem for this customer with this approach, we think they're going to choose it over the competitors
because of differentiator one and differentiator two. And it's, it's almost silly how simple this
thing is, but really powerful if for founders to have that, that clarity about, okay, here it all
is in one sentence. Now let's go, let's go test and make sure this is true. Amazing. Let's look at
an example. That's a really good idea. I know you brought some, some examples you're going to do
some screen sharing. You're going to pull it up. If you're watching on YouTube, you'll be able to
see it. Also, if you're watching on Spotify, you can see the video. If you're an Apple star,
but do your best to describe what we're going to be looking at.
Yeah. So we're going to talk about this company called Latchit. First, this is the first company we'll
talk about. And Latchit is a startup who was in our last group of character labs and we can go into
to character labs later on. But essentially, this is a kind of an accelerator like program that we run
a character capital where we invest in a group of companies at the same time. And we run them
through that process that we were just describing where we start with a foundation sprint. And then
it's going to be a sequence of three design sprints after that so that they're testing and refining
that hypothesis. And so it's a great time for them. These are founders who have just started their
companies. They're kind of, you know, that precede very beginning zero stage. And the progress you can
see in those three and a half or weeks, it's phenomenal. So let's just let's talk about Latchit.
So Latchit, a couple co-founders, Chris and James, who were, they had left Substack. They were
engineers leading up the growth team at Substack. And they wanted to build a product for for
artisans. So if you imagine like you're a your jewelry maker, you're a, you know, your painter,
your woodworker, and you want to sell your products outside of your immediate, you know,
community, the physical place where you are at a physical location. Well, you can, you know,
you can build this site on Shopify, but you still have to market it. If you do that, you got to
figure out how to reach those folks. You can put your products on Etsy, but Etsy has become quite
commoditized. So you're going to be up against everybody everywhere. And it's going to be very hard
for you to build an identity there, like to build a sense of who I am, what I'm all about.
And so what Chris and James thought was, you know, maybe we could use some of the techniques and
methods we, we used at Substack to help people find other, you know, other newsletter writers
through their community, through recommendations they make, and, and help help out artisans in that
way. It would, wouldn't that be cool? So they were kind of at that stage. They had a few different
ideas about what form that might take, what that might look like when they joined character labs.
And so that's kind of the backdrop to, to this little quick story I'll tell.
And there's one really important thing to emphasize about Chris and James that Jake mentioned
briefly, but I think is, is worth repeating, which is that they're engineers. They are builders.
Their instinct is to write code. It's to build software. And they actually told us that they were
excited, but nervous to come into character labs where we would be encouraging them
not to write code right away, to take this time to clarify the differentiation, the, the structure
of what they're building and to validate that with customers before they went all in on building
a particular approach. And I think you'll see in this example how, while they were a little hesitant
to do that a front, eventually they saw how much more valuable it was to work in this way versus
just diving right into building something. That's actually really helpful context. And I,
speaking of a sub-stack, recommendations feature was one of the most game-changing features for
me with my newsletter. So because it basically supercharged my growth. So I get why they'd be so
excited about bringing this learning to other, to other ideas into their own startups. So thank
you guys for doing that. And yeah, I'm even more excited to see what they're building.
Well, let's take a look. So the, this board here that we're looking at, this is like their
mirror board. So we've got like a big template. And whether you're watching on YouTube or listening
to this episode, we'll, we'll talk about at the end how you can get access to this template,
which will kind of guide you through the process. But what happens in this first step in the
foundation's brand, in the basics, as you said before, is that we're going through a sequence of
questions. Who's the most important customer, for example, is the first question, the very first
question that a team needs to answer. And as we do that, this is an important side note. We're
using this tactic that we call work alone together. And specifically, the noted vote is this method
where everyone's in silence. In this case, both Chris and James, but if you have a team of seven,
it's all seven people, be working in silence, writing down their own answers to this question.
Who's the most important customer? Who are all the different kind of customers we might consider?
Writing down multiple answers. And then once we've got those answers, the team's going to vote on
those. And then one person who's designated as the decider, usually it's going to be the CEO of
the startup, but it could be, in some cases, maybe it's the, the, you know, chief product officer,
whatever, however they decide to do it. But one person's going to say, okay, this is our decision
for now. And now we're going to move on. And by doing this and using silence and using structure
and then having a designated decision-making process, we can move through a lot of conversations
very quickly and save some of that energy that it requires to make decisions for the decisions
that matter most. In this case, what we're really worried about on day one of our foundation sprint
is differentiation. So we don't want to spend too long on the basics. Anyway, we motor through
customer problem, the capability, the insight, the motivation that the team has, those are all
advantages. And who are the competition? And we get this, this sort of one page sheet, the basics.
And it's going to have the answers to all those questions. Who's our customer? In this case,
artisans who want to sell online, but they sort of find tech and marketing to be hard.
The problem is sales growth. Yeah, if we, if we jump down to the competition, their number one
competitor is Shopify. But Etsy is another way people approach this, as we mentioned. But there's
also, you know, in-person sales and art fairs or other ways that people try to get at this problem.
And realistically, if you're delivering a solution, you need to stand out from all of those.
And then there's their advantages. We talked about, you know, this, this key one. They built
substax network growth features. So they know how to do this thing. So now that we've established
the basics, we're going to move on to differentiation. Before you do that, actually, let me ask a question
here. Because I think people seeing this could think, oh, this is like, I know all this stuff.
So obviously it's like, it's like, okay, I got an idea. I don't need to do this.
Where do you find people most often surprised by something that emerges out of this?
Is like one of these buckets often, wow, we, this is often not what you expect it, or is it
generally a lot of surprises? What do you, what do you experience there?
I think the moment where you immediately start to see value is when everyone on the team is
writing down their answers to these questions. And then people put their heads up and look at
what everyone else has written. And they realize, oh, that's not what I would, that's not what I
said. Or I didn't think of that one. Or, you know, gosh, the actual concrete reality of going
through with the team and being very transparent and clear about how we're making decisions too
about each of these things. When that basic sheet comes together and you see the specifics,
the specifics are surprising, but it's also familiar. We look at it and say, yeah, that looks,
that all looks right, but I'm surprised by the specifics. They're not what I would have
written if I had written it down. I might have gotten two of those things, two of the, you know,
six items on there. And I think that's what's, that's what's most surprising. And I think it's also
kind of a sense of relief that like, okay, well, that's very reassuring that we have, we have clarity
about that and we've made it concrete. These activities that we do during the basics are
impactful for different reasons. I think that problem can be really interesting because when
teams sit down and think about it, it is often less clear than they thought that what the actual
problem is. Like, wait, what problem do our customers really have that we're solving for them?
I think competition can be sort of an aha moment when they start to think beyond just,
what are the other startups in this space? Like, if this is an important problem, your
customers probably already solving it somehow. It may be a workaround, it may be an alternative,
it may not be a direct competitor, but if it's worth solving, they probably have some way of
dealing with it today. And what is that? And when you zoom out and you look at that set of competitors,
it can be a little scary, but it is also an important moment for teams. And then I think that
advantage isn't necessarily immediately beneficial, but it becomes really valuable when the teams
are looking at differentiation because startups can't compete with big companies on scale or on
having built-in distribution advantages or having partnerships in place. So they really have
to dig deep and figure out what can we do that nobody else is capable of doing? And so by taking
time to sit down and do this almost unnatural act of like, wait, why are we special? And
when we're able to encourage teams to really think about that, it sets them up really nicely
for the next step, which is differentiation, ideally based on those advantages.
What I'm hearing is a lot of the value here is also just everyone has the answers in their head
in some way, but just seeing what everyone else is thinking and then aligning on one is a lot of
this value. Yeah, it's like thinking deeply and quietly about it yourself and then seeing what
everybody else comes up with when they are able to also think deeply and quietly about it.
And then, ideally, if they're working with us and character labs, having somebody who's a bit
external to push them and say, try harder. Dig deeper. What really makes you special here? How are
you really going to be open AI? How are you really going to be Google at this?
This whole idea of noting and voting and working in silence, such a recurring theme on this
podcast of not doing brainstorms in large groups. It feels like that's just dead in every way.
I just had this naming expert on the podcast who names some of the biggest companies in the world,
Pentium, PowerBook, Sonos, or so. And that's their approach is they used to do brainstorms,
and he's like, that doesn't work. And now they just have small teams sitting quietly in a room
working together on ideas and then thinking on their own. So that's such an interesting trend.
Yeah. And I feel like idea, we just created this whole, we need to brainstorm post-its and then
everyone's like, that's not actually working. Let's stop doing that. And the other thing that I
feel as you're talking through this, like what I'm feeling this is there's for founders,
there's not like a manual for starting a company. You always have, it feels like this dark
art of like, I guess I got a fine product market fit and this idea. It feels like this is almost a
manual of everything you need to do to just get the basics of, is this even worth doing?
Yeah. And that's why we created it because we were, we still are investing in founders who
are, you know, they're, they're incredibly talented and they're smart and they have a background
that is going to give them an advantage in building some particular product. But you're right,
there's, there's no manual and we were just kind of solving our own problem and, you know, we,
we believe in this so much and we see the ROI is being so great that this is the first thing we do
when we make an investment, you know, we invest in a company and then we run a foundation sprint
with them right away. We run more foundation sprints with startups than we do design sprints at this
point. And you know, I don't think we can ever encapsulate every single thing that you need to know
or that you need to do to start a company. But this is our, this is our best take at like what
you should do in the early days to set yourself up for success and maximize the chances that you're
going to reach product market fit. Amazing. Okay. Let's keep going. So we've done the basics.
We'll come next. Yeah. So we've done the basics and another important thing that we've accomplished
while going through the sequence of activities in the basics is to boot up the right context
into everyone's head so that we're ready for the main event of this first day, which is differentiation.
And I still have very firmly in my mind, like I grew up with a Mac plus computer and you'd put in,
you know, the disk and the drive and you'd have to, you'd have to boot up the the app that you
wanted to run that that's kind of the way our brains work. Like we have limited working memory and
we've got to have the right stuff in there when we're, when we're going to make a big decision,
when we're going to think hard about a certain problem or question, it's important to have the right
context fresh at hand. So the basics is really the context for thinking about differentiation.
And differentiation is the heart of what we're doing in the foundation spread because
it goes without saying perhaps, but we like to say it, when you are making a new product,
people want to ignore it. People want to not pay attention to it. And if they do have to pay
attention to it, if it gets in their face, they, they want to not try it because we just are all
bombarded by so many things and that's never been more true than it is now. And we, so we have
defenses up to save, to save calories in our brain. We just, we don't want to engage.
It's crucial then that a product has a clear promise that it makes and that that promise is,
radically differentiated from the alternatives. And that that promise is strong enough that
you'll try it and then that the product delivers on that promise. And so when we talk about
differentiation, we're saying, look, we want you to be really clear on your promise. Not the
promise you're making to investors about this technology and what's special about the technology
or what's special about the market opportunity, but with the customer at the center. We've started
the basics by talking about the customer and the problem they have and the way they see the world.
And we want to talk about what you're going to offer to the customer and how it's going to
separate from the alternatives. And so in the end of this next phase of the foundation sprint,
we're going to have a two by two diagram that's going to look like a business school 101 diagram.
And in fact, we often refer back to this Steve Jobs iPhone introduction slide where he talks about
the the iPhone and he makes a joke about it. This is a business school 101 diagram, but
it's really helpful to start developing your product with this clarity about this is the promise
we'll make to customers at the end. And we're going to deliver on that promise because we can test
and prove that in design sprints. So anyway, we start off, we talk about differentiators and we talk
about classic differentiators, fast to slow, smart to not so smart to borrow from the iPhone slide,
easy to use to hard to use and so on. And we just start off and have the team, okay, let's just
score those up against the competition, put a sticky note on those continuums showing where you
think the product could be. And usually you'll do this and maybe you'll start to see, well, there
are a couple places where we can stand out on these classics. That's great. These classics are
easily understandable by any, you know, any customer we're all sort of familiar with these kinds
of things. So, okay, that's great. Then we get into writing custom differentiators. So we're
going to write a bunch of, you know, good things on one end, crummy opposite on the other end,
and then we're going to score those. And so for the Latchit story, we'll pick up with Chris and James
here. You know, they've written, well, we could be really, we could really differentiate on network
versus siloed. Our approach is networked if you're using Shopify or your siloed, right? Or we,
you know, maybe we can differentiate on painless business growth versus labor intensive business
growth. So that might be the specific way we describe the promise of our product. So after
evaluating a bunch of these, writing a bunch of these, voting on them quietly, you know, and then
the decider is going to say, all right, I want to choose a couple of these and we're going to try
them out. The teams are going to, if you're running a foundation sprint, you're going to try out
a few differentiators, you're going to score against your competitors. They're going to create a
scale and you're going to say, okay, I'll just be honest. Let's be tough. Where do we really think
we could stack up against the competitors on this differentiator we've chosen in great detail,
plotting each, each company or product one at a time. Okay. So, you know, you do that for one
differentiator. You do it for another. You do it until you feel like we've got two that are really
strong. And then you make that business school 101 diagram. And so, you know, here's, here's
this one for, so as Lyric, they changed their name to Latchet. Oh, I did that real time. I love this
real time. So, yeah. So Latchets, you know, up here in the top right corner and we say, okay,
look, this is a good differentiation chart because you've got this quadrant here, this quadrant here,
this quadrant here, right? You've got the, so you're in the top right and you've got to be in the top
right. What's it got to be in the top right? You always have to be in the top right. And if you
see those others three quadrants, the top left, the bottom left, the bottom right, those form
in L shape and we call that loser vill. So we want to, we want to have like a way of looking at the
world that puts all of the competitors into loser vill. And then we want to say, okay, if you can
deliver on that and if that promise is compelling to customers, so both those things have to be true.
Can you deliver on it and do customers care and believe that that matters to them? If both of those
things are true, you have a really compelling promise. You have the possibility of a very successful
product. So now we've identified that and that's, that becomes a core of our hypothesis.
Can we, is that differentiation true? So that's the differentiation step. Before you move on to
the next step, is that where you're going next? Just so I could take a, yeah, yeah, okay,
follow a couple of threads. This is so awesome. There's so many, there's just so much value here.
Also just a slide at the end here, folks are watching YouTube. This is like your deck slide
right where you show your competitors and you're better than them all. Yeah. And actually,
I want to jump on that for a second because we've all seen two by two. Right, there's a ton of
these. They're all over the place. And if you're anything like me, I just ignored these. I just
thought these were pretty much BS up until like, well, whenever we started these foundations,
friends, three or four years ago. And I think the reason why usually these, these two by two
diagrams feel like this is just consultant below me. This is just like who we are now. It's,
it's because you know, maybe one person makes this chart and they do it quickly because they need
it to slide for the slide deck. And the audience they're considering, maybe it's investors. And so,
you know, often these describe technology or they describe the market opportunity. They don't talk
about the customer's perspective. And the other thing is that they're, they're not proven. There's
no evidence behind the fact that these are these true. So if they are, if they did happen to be
about customer perspective, it's unlikely that the whole team would have weighed in on on what those
differentiators are. And it's very unlikely that we would have tested and proven that that that
matters and that we can deliver on it. And so if you do all of those things and you do it at the
beginning of the project, we think this has the potential when we've seen it, it's, it becomes this
while this guiding light. Here's the North Star. We need to deliver on this. This is what we have
to create. And that helps you make decisions all the way through your product development cycle.
Just to point people to justification for why differentiation is so important. There's a couple
episodes that I did that I'll point to in the show notes that just give you more context
of why you need to differentiate. So I spoke of David Plastic, who is this naming expert that we
just had on the podcast. He has whole thing is when he's coming up with a name for like sono,
server cell or wind serif. It's different. It has to differentiate. And he talks about this in
depth. So I'll point to that episode if you're and this is just like if you're not convinced,
why we're spending so much time with differentiation. Also April Dunford, who's like the, I don't know,
the, the God of positioning. She has differentiation in such a core part of her approach to positioning.
And so there's just like so much evidence to tell you that you differentiation is a really
important step and element of successful companies. One of the things that I've noticed about
these topics that these the basics we talked about already differentiation this notion of
you need a foundation for your project. It's a bit more under the radar for people. I think it's
a bit harder for people to immediately see like, oh, we need this. We see the people who react the
strongest to this and have the strongest like immediate affinity to this idea actually being
startup founders. People who are really sophisticated like in this challenge product managers who are at,
you know, we're invited in to speak at OpenAI and Anthropic about this. And we see the product
people there being like, oh, my God, this is this is really powerful. This is the kind of stuff we
need. I think for a lot of folks though, it can sound like this is just elementary, you know,
differentiation. Of course, we need to differentiate. The problem is that all of this stuff gets
background. It's something we've thought about a bit. We assume we're on the same page. We
assume we're going to deliver something. But then kind of business as usual happens. We build a
product. We get kind of more interested in the technology and delivering that. And we end up
trying to sell it to customers at the end. We end up putting a coat of paint on it with the
marketing page or sales deck. We haven't actually built from the beginning to saying that we know
it's going to matter to people. One of the most useful steps here that I haven't seen before
is just a starting place for how to even start thinking about differentiation. Like everyone's
always probably thinking price and speed maybe. You guys have a really cool just starting list that
you showed here. Anything more you can add here for helping people start to think about ways to
differentiate beyond the obvious price and speed and I don't know, a couple more. So I'm just going
to jump into another startup here just so we can see what this sheet looks like with scores on
it. So this is a startup called mellow. Anyway, the standard classic differentiators where we start,
they are fast to slow, smart to not so smart, easy to use to hard to use, free to expensive,
focused to one size fits all, simple to complicated and integrated to siloed. So you could probably argue
there's these others that should be included or some of those should be taken off. But what we like
about this is that it's a small set. They're easy to understand. We know customers can understand
these and they create a great starting place for your team to think about differentiation because
you can quickly look at this list and start scoring where you think your product could be on these
scales. And you know that if you can use one of these people will understand it. But it also starts to
make the team comfortable with this notion of differentiation. And again, we want to make
differentiation something that all of the co-founders or all of the core team can participate in.
It's not just the job of the person writing the pitch deck. It's not just the job of the
marketer or the salesperson, but we're getting everybody's perspectives in on it. And this is a
great warm-up activity before we start to write our own custom differentiators.
Awesome. And then again, this is just inspiration for coming up with more waste to differentiate.
Something that is a common question I think for founders is price as a differentiator? Is there
any insight you guys have there? Like how often do you land on price being a good differentiator
with the startups you work with? I think price is rarely the most important differentiator.
Part of what's interesting about going through these classic differentiators, these standard ones
first, and then jumping into the custom ones is that the classic ones are sort of universal. But it
is going to be hard to beat the competition on very many of these. Like it's going to be hard to
build a product that's faster than what Google can build or what OpenAI can build. It's going to
be harder to be cheaper than those competitors because they just have so many more resources.
They can have loss leader products that are underpriced. Where I think pricing has become
a really clear advantage for some companies is those that are leveraging AI to solve problems
that were previously unsolvable with software. So we have a company that we invested in
called Bindwell. They use AI to design precision pesticides. We ran a foundation sprint with them
right after investing. Five years ago, you couldn't design pesticides with AI. It wasn't possible.
Even if you had that idea, you wouldn't have been able to build it. Now you can. For them,
one of the big advantages is these pesticides, they can be a lot cheaper because it doesn't require
this massive team of R&D chemists to tinker and experiment with things in the lab to try to
create new pesticides. We can design them with AI. So it is more often true in AI companies like
that. But it's very difficult to compete on price in general. And we think we find that it is not
as durable of an advantage as some of these other things. That is such a good point because
historically price has been a don't compete on price. For exactly what you said, it's hard to
do long term. It's kind of raised to the bottom. Especially if there's incumbents, they can price
a lot lower. But with AI, that is a really often and strong differentiator. Like now do this thing.
Like Kerser, you're basically competing on. You're saving engineering time and it's worth so
much money to you. Yeah. In time, the output of the AI is probably not going to be quite as good
as a human process. So it can be a little bit cheaper for now. But it has to be a lot cheaper.
It has to be, you know, I've heard people offer 10X cheaper than the legacy sort of manual approach
to solving that problem as a rule of thumb. That's awesome. Okay. I'll just quickly reference
there is an episode that will come out before this with Motivon about pricing strategy. And
there's a lot of discussion actually on this. Oh, great. Especially with how to design your price
with customers as you're starting a company. Also, the episode with the founder of Superhuman
Rahul, he actually spent, there's a lot of cool context on how he differentiated Superhuman.
And it was actually very much on speed. Is speed actually? Yes. Speed was where he landed.
And to your point, it was both, it was the Venn diagram of what you said. Can we do this
and do people value it? And that's where his research pointed to is people really value this.
And they were able to achieve it. One of the things that's really interesting about this
example here that we're looking at in mellow is that you can see that they were not the best
on all these scales. You know, it's in if teams are going through and they're being really realistic
about how they stack up against the competition, it's normal and natural to find that you're not
going to be the best on all these differentiators. And that is really helpful for creating clarity
in your positioning and in your marketing because you're not going to show a featured checklist
chart that, you know, says you're better at everything than every competitor. But if you can
drive home one or two things that your customers really care about and that you can be radically
better at, it's going to improve your chances of winning and finding product market fit. And
we find that going through this process where you're not just thinking about one differentiator
at a time, are you not trying to win on all of them, but you're looking across this scale of options
and you're being just really honest about where you stack up. Can both point you in the right
direction in terms of what you will win on, but also can give you the comfort to say, hey,
it's okay if we're not better than every single company and every single one of these things.
That's great context. That's going to make people feel a lot better, I think.
Today's episode is brought to you by Coda. I personally use Coda every single day
to manage my podcast and also to manage my community. So I put the questions that I plan to
ask every guest that's coming on the podcast. So I put my community resources to how I manage
my workflows. Here's how Coda can help you. Imagine starting a project that work and your vision
is clear, you know exactly who's doing what and where to find the data that you need to do your part.
In fact, you don't have to waste time searching for anything because everything your team needs
from project trackers and OKRs, the documents and spreadsheets lives in one tab all in Coda.
With Coda's collaborative all in one workspace, you get the flexibility of docs, the structure
of spreadsheets, the power of applications, and the intelligence of AI, all in one easy to organize
tab. Like I mentioned earlier, I use Coda every single day and more than 50,000 teams trust Coda
to keep them more aligned and focused. If your startup team looking to increase alignment
and agility, Coda can help you move from planning to execution in record time.
To try it for yourself, go to Coda.io slash Lenny today and get six months free of the team plan
for startups. That's C-O-D-A dot IO slash Lenny to get started for free and get six months
of the team plan. Coda.io slash Lenny. Anything else in differentiation before we move on to the
third step of designing your approach? I think it's worth taking a look at what it looks like when
you have a bunch of sort of these custom crafted differentiators. What that might look like? Because
in the case of Mellow, we've got, I don't know, there must be 25 here. So they've written
purposeful, magical, clear, personal, provides direction, flexible, human, creative, beautiful,
all kind of, and on and on. What they're trying to get at and what we want every team to sort of
think about here is what is a new version of reality, a new lens that you can offer to your
customers on the world? Because a lot of times you're building a new product, you actually have to
change the way people think about what's possible and what matters to them. Those classics
are often already well-trodden ground where other people have differentiated they've already
thought about it. But these new particular things that you know are possible with your technology
that you know is possible with the customer problem, the things that you believe might matter.
It's really interesting to you try some very fine-tuned list of, sometimes just a slight variation.
We've slightly changed this wording or the way we describe what's great about what we do,
and that is the thing we think is really going to stand out. And again, you can see even on this list
that they've custom-written when we see where they score it, they're not all the way to the good
end of the scale on all of them. You know, when they get honest and look through, they're like,
well, actually, you know, maybe we can't deliver on this. But this one we really can, and this one
we also suspect will matter to customers. Where did Mellow land on the differentiators they picked
and where did Latchet land? Yeah, let's take a look. For Mellow, they tried out a bunch before
they decided here. So they actually scored with the competitors on these scales. And just for
context, Mellow is a tool that allows you to run very simple, very targeted, very useful AI agents
for common everyday tasks like summarizing your email or cleaning up your calendar or drafting
responses to messages. And one of their insights was that there's been so many AI products that
have over-promised about being able to replace all humans and do anything and, you know, 10-X-year
productivity. But so few of them have actually delivered on those promises. And so they have this
insight that if they can be really focused and really human and really high quality and they can
deliver on that promise of, you know, making your life better by offloading tedious tasks that
that's going to really click with customers. That's a great context. Thank you for having that.
So Mellow lands on mobile first and works out of the box if there are two differentiators. And
they're trying to differentiate from, you know, gum loop and open AI as a generalized tool. And
latch it, they're going to differentiate on, and we're pulling it up. If folks aren't watching,
he's pulling up the mirror board to show us where they landed. Latch it, they're going to
differentiate on, helps you grow and cooperative. So when they compare against Etsy, when they
compare against Shopify or setting up your table at an art fair, they're going to differentiate
on helps you grow and cooperative. And they think none of the competitors does both of those
things well. That is cool. Thank you for sharing that. And to your point, this is where they think
it will work. And then the next step is actually test this in the market, which is where we go from
here. So let's move on to the next step in which is the final step of the foundation sprint.
Yeah. So closing off differentiation is a short step that is just to create some project principles
that will help you make decisions in line with that differentiation. And you know, you're just
talking about superhuman and differentiating on speed. And when John and I worked at Google
back in the 2000s, there was this list called Tim things we've found to be true. And one of the
things on that list was fast is better than slow. And what was interesting is this is a mantra that
you would actually hear people using in meetings to help dictate decisions. You know, well, we're
considering this approach to this view or this approach, this approach renders 12 milliseconds
faster. That's probably going to be the one we're going to take. As you said, you're really
compelling reason for us to not go with just the one that renders faster or the one that gets the
user to their benefit with one less click. And this notion that you can have a decision making
guide. We think we've seen it be so useful for us in those contexts. We think, hey, this is an
easy moment. You've got your differentiators kind of loaded up in your mind. Let's take a second
here and just think, what's a principle? How can we turn that into a principle? So if we take a look
at, watch it, you know, they've got help sellers help each other. So if they're trying to make a
decision between two approaches, well, which one of these help sellers help each other? Or do the
thing that makes sellers more money? If we're choosing between two things, let's do the one that
helps make them more money. And so we then we've kind of moved on. We've got a mini manifesto. We
call it, which is that differentiation chart. And these principles and the notion is this page,
the basics page was just kind of the core simple stuff you need to know about this project.
The mini manifesto in one page is your decision making guide. This is so cool. And this looks like
it would take a lot of work. But again, this is just a day or two of sitting around working through
this framework. Yeah, you'll get to this in, you know, four-ish hours with your, okay, by the end of
the first day, you'll have a mini manifesto that describes how you win essentially as a company
in a startup. Yeah. Or how you believe it's going to work. And of course, we're going to test it.
Yeah. Now the next phase of the foundation sprint is just locking in on the approach we're going
to start with. So we'll continue the story of latch it here to it's easier to use an example
than to describe this in the abstract. So coming into character labs, latch it had sort of four
approaches in mind, but they weren't sure which one to take. So they might build an app that's one
approach they could take. They might build a sort of a newsletter platform. That's something
obviously they knew how to do. They might build a Shopify plugin. That's a simple way to kind of
piggyback on something people are already doing. They're right. They're number one competitors
Shopify. Or they might have to build the full stack. And I think a big question for them was
which of these and how much do we have to build before there's enough value for customers that
they're actually going to adopt it. We're actually going to get some traction and get this thing going.
And it's important to call out here that all four of these approaches solve the same problem
for the same customer. And they are all likely to differentiate from the competition in the same
ways based on the unique advantages that the founders, Chris and James bring to this company.
So these are not like wildly different product ideas or company ideas. These are just different
approaches. You have the same destination in mind, but you say, hey, which path can we take? It's
like pulling up directions on Google Maps. This one's a little faster. This one uses less fuel.
This one avoids tolls. What's the right approach for us to take?
And I love that the work you did on that first day eliminates a lot of ideas you probably had
that you would have probably spent time building and then realizing, okay, this doesn't make any
sense. It's just like whatever it else has. Totally, totally. Yeah. And we usually see teams
starting projects in one of two states. And one state is the state that latch it, find
themselves in where gosh, there's a few different ways we could do this. How do we decide?
We can discuss and discuss and discuss, but you know, that could go on forever. So that's state one.
We know there are some options. And state two is we're pretty locked in on one approach already.
We think we've got this figured out. In either of those cases, we think it's worth taking again,
like about, you know, four hours ish to be really careful to lay out the options. If you think
there's only one option to sort of force yourself to think, well, what if this doesn't work?
What's another alternative? Or is there another alternative that we have previously considered
and dismissed that we should maybe reconsider just to make sure? And end with a situation where
you've made a decision clearly about, okay, we've considered alternatives. This is our first choice.
And you've also identified, this is our backup plan so that failure doesn't seem quite so scary
when we start to run experiments. And we're really able to pivot fast if should that happen.
So what we're going to do on the second day of the foundation spread through this sort of
third phase, which is the approach is to identify those different paths. So for latch it here,
they've got ABC and D options. We're going to color code those. And then we're going to plot them
on these charts. So we've got these different lenses. We call this activity magic lenses. And the
notion is, if we had a discussion about it and we could, as investors, if we could imagine,
like waving a magic wand and putting the perfect team of advisors in place to counsel the founders
on this decision, we would love for them to have a customer expert, somebody who's just brilliant
vision for the product and the customer experience. And they're hammering their fist on the table,
saying the customer, the customer, the customer, make the decision that's best for the customer.
And so we'll plot those options on these axes of easy to use versus hard to use and perfect
solution to the customer problem versus just an okay solution to the customer problem.
And then similarly, we want some an advisor who's going to pound their fist on the table for
building something cheap and fast, getting it out in the market, being pragmatic, get it out
there as fast as possible. That's the pragmatic lens. We want somebody who's going to advocate
for growth. What's the way to reach the most customers, get it in people's hands as fast as
possible, easy to adopt. We want somebody who's going to advocate for money for the financial
health of the business. So what's going to create long-term value for the customers, where's
where's the biggest audience of these folks? We want to look at differentiation, which we spent,
you know, the first half of the foundation spread establishing, well, we want to consider these
approaches through that lens as well. And so what the teams will do is to plot these options
on these lenses. They'll almost always create some lenses of their own, some custom lenses that
matter to them. You know, they might have one about their conviction. I think there's sort of a
humorous one from Melo, where it's like, which, you know, founder is like, yes, exactly when I
want to build. And on the other end of the spectrum, it's like, you know, nah, just kind of the
the sort of heat of excitement that you feel, that might be a really important decision.
That feels really important. Like that feels like that should be one year. You call these the
magic lenses. Yeah. Yeah. It probably should be. It probably should. Just like how excited are
you to build this? It feels like a really important piece. Yeah. We saw that one in this is the
our cohort of labs that's going on right now. And I'll bring that one that one up for context.
If we add it, we can call it the Lenny lens. Lenny lens. Yeah. Oh, that's a good idea. Yeah.
Yeah. So yeah. So here it is. And you can see that Marie is more likely to swear than
been, apparently, but it's it's crucial, right? And many founders, they'll have different.
One of the challenges is that for each founder, I think, each set of founders, there's maybe a different
way that they phrase what that means. What conviction means to them. And sometimes, and maybe it's
as simple as this. It's just, I just feel it. I just know. And sometimes it's a little bit more like,
well, I'd, you know, it's, it's a, it's conviction, but it's also what's the data that we have behind
it. And that's what forms my intuition about it. Awesome. I love that lens. I love that your
asterisk out. So it's not a little bit, a little bit, a little, a little slightly concealed slightly.
That's the part. Yeah. If you zoom in, it's actually not censored. So the cool thing about this
lens is the end. You've done all that. You've plotted it all out. And if you're having a conversation
like that, you just have to sort of maintain and memory. What did that person say? What did that
other person say? What's that conversation? I had, you know, a week ago, whatever. Here,
it's all laid out. And sometimes you zoom out. And it's honestly as simple as like, Oh, hey,
look, you know, the, the blue one is in the top right quadrant of almost every single lens. Like,
what, what is that one? What's going on? That might just be an easy decision. Sometimes you zoom out
and you say, Oh, clearly, like nothing wins in every lens. And that's actually really reassuring.
Because then you know, there is no perfect decision. There's nothing that checks all the boxes.
And that's going to help us decide because now we decide which is the most important lens,
which is the most important viewpoint to take. And you can, you can actually move forward in either
to either way, either situation you get in where there's sort of consistency across all the lens is
or there's not you either pick a lens or you just pick the, the consensus winner.
I love that this step answers a question that's been in the back of my mind that I think a lot of
people wonder is they're hearing this is just why don't I just build something and launch it and learn
and like, what am I spending all this time sitting in a room? And this is, and this to me is a big part
of the answer is just like spending an hour or two thinking through here's the ideas we have.
How do they compare on the, how do they look on these magical lenses, which makes so much sense.
How do they just filter on what customers will love most will help us grow the fastest,
will drive the most money, things like that. It's such a simple quick exercise that will save you
so much time building and launching and having to spend time learning. That is weekdays,
months of work versus a couple of hours can save you so much of that time.
And it's also the case that you start building something. It's exciting. You can move fast.
It's easy to easier and easier to see progress now with AI tools.
And that act of building and starting to create something has a
momentum of its own that can be hard to stop. And if you're headed in the wrong direction,
you can spend a lot of time building and making progress. But it's just, if it's not progress in
the right direction, it's actually hurting you. And that's why we want people to pause and take
this. It's really, as you said earlier, the ROI is high. But it feels very unnatural to pause
when you're so excited at the beginning and ready to go to pause and say, okay, let's make sure
we're taking the right path. But you know, you just imagine your, you know, your Gandalf,
your Frodo, you're starting off, you're trying to get to Mordor, it's a long trip.
You don't want to take the wrong path. You want to take the, you know, think before you start
marching through, you know, the swaps or whatever. One phenomenon we've seen when teams are
building things really quickly with AI is that the more AI generated or assisted they are,
the more generic, they tend to turn out, which makes sense if you think about how
LLMs were developed, you know, they're all basically pre-trained on the same data. And so in this
excitement and this rush to say, wow, look at how fast we can build it, you actually end up with
something that is less differentiated than what already exists in the world. And then, you know,
let's say you launch it and that, you know, takes longer than building sort of a clickable prototype,
but you launch it because you're moving so fast. And then you get data from the people who managed
to find that thing about what they did with it, but you don't get any data about what they didn't
do with it. And you certainly don't get any data about the people who never found it, who never,
you know, tried it, maybe they landed on your website and they're like, blah, another like,
another generic AI generated thing, like that's not worth my time. And so we think it's really helpful
to basically put yourself in a situation where you can slow down a little bit and do some like
some some hard thinking, some deep thinking about what's actually going to make your product unique.
And then you can switch into this mode of like, okay, great, now let's go as fast as possible and
get that out into customers hands. But if you don't take this step first, it's actually kind of
counterintuitive that going fast can actually slow you down in the long run. Yeah, to build on that,
I had this guest recently, Bob Baxley. Yeah, I was. Okay. So he has this really interesting insight.
He calls, he calls it, I think he calls it the primal mark. Essentially his feedback is
way as long as possible to start any sort of sketch or prototype because as soon as you start
drawing what you're building, it now everything you do will be a response to that. And so the more
time you can spend before starting to concept out the solution, the more likely art of land on
something that works. Yeah, that is super interesting. And you know, it's it is counterintuitive.
Yeah. And I find myself challenged to think about it in the context of the sprints that we run
with founders, but I think one way to interpret that in in the work that we do is that we used to
just run design sprints with with every team like that was our hammer and and you know, everything
looked like a nail. And part of what we found so valuable about doing the foundation sprints is
that it it keeps you away from ideation for just a little bit longer and it it forces you to think
about, you know, why you're unique and and the market that you're going into before you get to
that moment of creating something that looks realistic and then maybe being a little bit locked
into to that approach. That's such a like I love that that this emerge out of that. Like you guys
are we're so design sprint oriented and it's just like cool. It's just make prototype. Let's
design. Let's make it real. Let's show people. And that's like I think where a lot of people's
minds are at more and more or and maybe as a result. And then this is almost like a okay,
maybe that wasn't the right approach to start. Maybe it's actually better to think a little bit
of what we want to design and build before. And so just the fact that you guys spent so much your
life and time on that and then realize this is actually potentially even more important to do
is it says a lot. Well, and I ideas always get to still down to like one thing that people
grab onto and they they focus on. And I think with the design sprint, it got to still down to
just build a prototype. Just quit messing around and build something. But the reality is when
you run a design sprint, it's five days and you don't build the prototype until the fourth day.
So you do a bunch of work to figure out how does our customer learn about this thing?
What are the different ideas that we're bringing to what our solution could look like?
Which of those are the most likely to work? And only then at the end of the week, are you building
a prototype? But I do think that as the that method has become really widely known, people just
think about the, you know, let's build something. And then once you multiply that times the power of AI,
it definitely creates this narrative that the only way to build something new is to just create
the product as quickly as possible. And that doesn't really match our experience. You know,
that doesn't really kind of fit the pattern of what we've seen working best across the few
hundred companies that we've worked with. I think this validates in some ways the role of a
product manager, where PM's job is to help the team figure out what should we be building. And
are we all aligned on what we're building before we start designing and building? And so this is
almost like, like this process is almost like the product requirements document of a company.
Wait, I think a lot of product people listening to this will feel really good about.
Yeah, we see this as a great tool for product people. It's a way to give you a structure
for leading your team through those decisions and a way to give the all the folks on a team,
including the person who's the product leader, but the person who's the engineering leader,
the person who's the marketing leader, the sales leader, the design leaders.
The exact right opportunity to contribute and participate in forming the strategy,
the exact right opportunity as we get into design sprints following the foundation sprints
to then make it real and, you know, turn that idea, that hypothesis about what might work
into hopefully evidence that it does work. I feel like it's actually more helpful than
to engineers, like non-product people, because I think a PM brain would be like, I want to do this
intuitively, whether they do it right or not. I think it's other functions almost. They're like,
no, just jump straight to design, straight to prototyping. Let me ask you, like, what we're in this
tangent, we're in this wild tangent out of this process, but I want to, as this question has been
my mind, because I recently had a founder on the podcast, Mayor, who built this company called
Base 44, he built it, it sold in six months for $80 million to weeks. And this journey of that is,
he just had a problem, he wanted to solve for himself, for his girlfriend, for a scouts program,
he built it, people started using it, he kind of evolved it from there. And obviously he didn't go
through a process like this. Thoughts on just like, is it okay to just do that? When should someone
think about, okay, I should actually set a site time to do a foundation sprint versus, like,
I'm just motivated to solve a problem for my friend, so I'm just gonna build it, evolve it, iterate
with them, kind of go from there. One of the observations from our hundreds of experiences
working alongside founders in the early days of their projects and watching them make decisions
and watching them try things and succeed or fail is that there are so many founders who are
incredibly bright, incredibly capable. They have great insights about the market, about an
opportunity. And yet, their startup does not work out. And we, there's a problem with
selection bias that we, you know, we, we hear from the folks who, they were brilliant, they were,
you know, they checked all those boxes I just described, they saw a great opportunity,
they were smart, they executed well, they had courage and conviction and they did it.
And it worked out and it was a tremendous success. And I think that the danger in thinking like,
well, they didn't follow the process, so I don't need to. And, you know, that may be true. And,
you know, that's, that maybe, maybe you don't need it. But what we believe is you have a better,
this just increases your odds. This is a chance to get more clear on, is this a good opportunity,
to get more clear on, will the thing I build click with customers? And, you know, if you've already
figured out that, no, this thing's my, my product has taken off, my product is working. We've
actually had founders and labs who, well, they started off character labs and they said, you know,
I started selling this thing and it's already taking off. I want to stop running experiments. And
we're like, yeah, stop running experiments. You don't need to do this. If you've got a product
market fit, if you've got evidence that this thing is clicking and you're, you have conviction,
run with it. But if you're not there, this is a great path to get you going.
And if you're not sure if the thing you're going to build is going to turn into that, you know,
$80 million exit in, you know, six months, we believe this is a good chance to improve your odds.
People hearing this might feel like, I haven't heard of any company doing this. That has become a
trillion dollar IPO success. What, what would make me believe that this is a, the process I should
follow versus just, I'm just going to do what I hear on YC, just build it, launch it, or rate that
anything. What can you share to give people confidence? This is the approach to take.
Well, the first thing I'd say is give us some time where we're pretty new to this. We started
character labs about three years ago. We created the foundation sprint about three years ago.
But more seriously, when we were creating this method, one of the things that we did was look back
across all the projects we've been involved in and the ones that were really successful. And we
looked for patterns. And while those teams didn't have the foundation sprint, they ended up having
really clear differentiation in a really clear view of what made them unique, that they were
able to build on. And as we ran design sprints with them, we were able to test and validate
against that differentiation. So we believe that this is sort of a key to success, even if those
teams didn't have access to this exact same methodology. So what I'm hearing is this is essentially
like alpha in starting a company. This is a new process that companies are just starting to use.
You guys are working closely with founders and it's rooted in the success of many, many,
many companies that you guys that were involved in early on and continue to be involved in.
Yeah, it's based off of this thing we've seen again and again in the most successful projects.
When we're inside the room in the early days and we're seeing people make decisions,
this is what drives those decisions. It's differentiation. And so if we look back across,
you know, all of the sprints that we've been a part of over the years and John and I have been
inside lots of these rooms, lots of these conversations. And if you're not watching on YouTube,
by the way, there's a cool visual that Jake is showing. Yeah, it spans across Google, Google Ventures,
Character Capital. And if you're watching on YouTube, you'll see all these little white circles
and each one sort of represents, you know, a company that we've seen inside of during these
design sprints. And there are a lot of really great success stories in there. You know, we've
had the chance to, I mentioned the story of Google Mead and being there and figuring out what is it
that's going to make this thing stand out. That was what made the project finally start to take off.
And to this day is still sort of what animates it. Being inside of, you know, the early days of
what became Google photos or Google trips and some of the early design sprints and there's a lot
of other on here. But honestly, of course, we've also seen inside a lot that didn't work out.
If we looked inside the greatest hits, though, the real smash successes, we looked inside all of
those. We realized there is a common element and that common element and all of them is differentiation
that there was clarity around. This is what we're trying to prove to customers. This is the promise
we're making. And so we've been on those teams where we've worked alongside those founders who
have this clear idea of differentiation. And sometimes they're not right. They run the experiments
and they change it. But the thing is, they're keyed into differentiation as being crucial. They're
not just thinking about the product and trying to get the right shape of the product or trying to
make it usable or whatever. They're really keyed in on differentiation. And how do we find the
right promise and deliver on that promise and express that promise to customers? So to explain a
little bit quickly of what I mean by differentiation and how this is manifested in products we've seen,
if you go back to the early days of Gmail in the 2000s, you know, if you had email, you were probably
using hotmail or Yahoo and it worked fine and you didn't have to think about it and this new product
comes along and you're like, God, I'm not going to want to switch my email address. What a hassle.
Who wants to do that? No one. Gmail's promise was, hey, massive storage, great search. And as we
were building the product out and, you know, marketing and explaining it to people and making
decisions inside the project, we had to continue to deliver on great search, great search, great
search. That was that was key to standing out. Fast forward 2014 and we're working with this
tiny company who's now competing with Gmail, who's now like sort of the market leader people are
used to using in, you know, their teams. And here's this new messaging software called Slack
and they're trying to reach new customers and gosh, switching to Slack isn't even bigger hassle
than switching to your email address because everybody on the team has to switch. Well, Slack says,
hey, if you believe that having fun and boosting teamwork is important, it's going to be clear
to you. This is a new way of looking at the world. And when they were making their decisions in their
first big ad campaign, their first big marketing campaign, this was what they were trying to convey
to customers. So we kind of kind of see that from the inside. Another one, we didn't see this one
from the inside, but one that we're all sort of familiar with is what happened with, with
Chagy PT, you know, it goes from this trusted, I don't have to think about it, I'm going to run
a Google search to, oh, wow, it's a new way of looking at the world. There's zero clicks, just
tells you the answer, busing is great. This is also something that we've seen in some of the
early success stories from our own portfolio. So 2019, this company called Reclaim going after
calendar management. And, you know, most of us manage our own calendars, most of us don't have
administrators helping us out with that. And you know, it's free. We're in control. Reclaims
argument was, hey, we can automatically, we can use AI to help you focus and automatically
prioritize your calendar. And that animated enough people to take the plunge and switch and try it
out that they were able to build up an audience of, you know, tens of thousands of users and drop
box acquired them last year. A great answer to my question, you guys, who will prepare it for,
for those skeptics. Part of our motivation, our, our selfless motivation with this foundation
sprint is that, you know, now that we are investing our own money into companies and we're working
with all these founders, we want them to have that same clarity on differentiation. You know,
we saw how important that was to Gmail and to Slack and to all these other companies. And we
want to bring that, we want to sort of give them that same advantage and help them avoid the,
you know, the pitfalls that all the other unsuccessful teams and companies that we've seen have fallen
into. So that's, that's kind of what we're trying to do here is bring the lessons from these really
successful teams into, you know, any team that reads the book and runs this process.
And the special sauce that John and I bring is that we're obsessed with the sequence of
decisions that you make and how you work together with your team to make good decisions quickly.
And that specificity about the method is something that we, we do have a lot of evidence behind
it working well because of what's happened with the design sprint and with how many successful
teams have ever owned that at those companies who are, you know, trillion dollar or whatever kind
of genetics of team, all kinds of teams run design sprints. This is that same methodology around
how we work together at high velocity and high quality. And it's just brought to a different part
of the process. Excellent answer. Speaking of the method, we went on the world's most epic tangent.
I want to bring us back. We haven't finished actually going through the process. I think we're
towards the tail end of it. So let's just finish that. What else do you do? So you have this,
this, uh, yeah, I guess, yeah, let's catch us up. Let's catch up with Latchit. So as a refresher,
for you who forgot Latchit are building this tool for artisans. They want to help them sell with
the community networking features. Like you might find one sub stack and they've identified their
differentiation. They've identified their approach now using magic lenses and all of this is
going to come together to create a founding hypothesis. So if we help artisans solve online
sales growth with a social sales app and then they've also got their backup plan or we could build
the full stack solution. If that doesn't work, we believe they're going to choose it over Shopify
and Etsy because our solution is cooperative and easy to use. And in this single sentence,
we've laid bare their strategy and now they're going to try to find out was that work?
So that is so cool. So the output of the sprint is the founding hypothesis. And I love that the
term hypothesis is a part of this because it's not telling you this will work. This is the thing
you will now test. Absolutely. And every project has at its core, every new product has at its core
a hypothesis. There is a founding hypothesis. It's just usually not explicit. It's usually hidden
and different people on the team may have different ideas about what it is. And because it's not
explicit, it's very hard to interrogate it and test it and find out if the different variables in
it are right variables. I'm curious what's in that photo. It's at the right as you're showing the
YouTube. Oh, yeah. If you're on YouTube. So this is just we did this sprint together in person
and so on Latchet's board. And you're going to see that like here's where they wrote it out and
took a photo of it and dropped it in and then later filled it out on the mirror board. Beautiful.
And it has their old name there there. That's right. Yeah. Yeah. Every brand that lyric which
it turns out is not the easiest for SEO. So a lot of lyrics out there. There's a lot of lyrics. I
know some lyrics. And just to understand is the next step, the design sprint and that's where you
actually start testing. Exactly. So we zoom out now. We see now they're going to head into a
sequence of design spreads running one after another. Each of those design spreads starts with the
founding hypothesis. Then the team is going to say, okay, what are the biggest risks that you
know that hypothesis not being true? What do we need to assess right now? Going to make a map
of how customers discover the product, what that core experience looks like and then figure out
using that map. Where's the where's the key moment for assessing that risk that so for them,
the biggest risk is do people even, well, these artisans even want this thing? Are they actually
going to want to have a community sharing sort of sales platform? And they decide the key moment
for us to test that's actually on the landing page. They figure we can prototype landing pages
that describe the product and learn a lot for our first experiment just just with landing pages.
They're going to sketch solutions. This will be familiar to anyone who's you know heard about
design spreads. I guess each person sketching their own proposal for how that key moment should
choose the strongest of those. In this case, they choose they're going to actually prototype
three things. So they test three things head to head against each other, fake brands for each one.
So they look like three different products. And then this is a really key part. At the end of
the design sprint, we've got a scorecard. And this is actually a new innovation. This is not in
the sprint. Oh shit. Here we go. A lot of the presses design sprint improvement. So this scorecard
is going to break down the founding hypothesis. Hey, as we talked to each customer,
was this the right person as the right kind of customer for us? Do they have the problem that we
think they have? Was this the right approach for them? Did they choose it over the competition?
They're going to test these prototypes head to head and also show people like, okay, here's Etsy.
Here's Shopify. Now out of all these five options, think about out loud about, you know,
what do you, how do you compare these? So do we believe they'd actually choose it? That the
differentiation actually work for those differentiators valuable and motivating to them? Does it click?
So our new book is called click. And you know, the idea there is you can see when a product clicks
with one person. And that's a, that's a helpful signal. Now granted, these interviews are kind of a
simulation. It's not like the real world, but there are helpful signal that we're on track for
product market set. If we see, gosh, this product seems to be clicking with customer after customer,
that's a really strong signal. And that's when people start to get the confidence that it's
time to build. That's a really good term, by the way. That's a such a good way to describe what
it feels like. It doesn't just click with them. Just kind of clicks. Yeah. And if you look across
latch hits first scorecard, there's a ton of red. It's a lot of things that didn't work.
The conclusion at the end in this last column, there's a conclusion. Hey, we interviewed,
this case, they interviewed four customers. Well, it looks like this is the right customer. It
looks like they have this problem, but everything else kind of didn't work about the hypothesis.
The approach wasn't working. Differentiation wasn't working. There's some mini hypotheses,
kind of about the prototype itself, just lots of red on here. So they spread again. And just zooming
out for a second, this is a team who just started working on this new company. And you know, sometimes
it can feel slow. We talked about it feeling slow to go through all these steps, but they're only
a week in. And they've already built three prototypes. And they've tested those three prototypes.
It was four real customers. And they have this super detailed scorecard of here's what's working.
Here's not what's not working. That's after a week. So it's interesting how what can feel slow
in the hour to hour actually can really speed you up in the weeks and months time scale.
That was such good context because I was feeling that and to your point, most founders do not do this
much testing, iterating, learning in the first few weeks of their startup. They might spend a few
weeks just talking to customers without showing a prototype. And then they might spend a few months
building an MVP. And then they might, you know, maybe they're going to spend some more time talking
to customers while showing them the MVP, maybe they'll do manual onboarding, something like that.
But yeah, that plays out over months. And it fits with what founders tell us. You know, it's,
of course, it's a subjective measure. But founders who go through this process with us, they say that
they're able to accelerate three to four months of work into the three or four weeks back-to-back
sprints that we're doing together in character labs. Excellent context. Thanks for throwing that in
there. And these conversations with customers are so much more fruitful and pointed when you've
got the context that I know exactly what my hypothesis is and you have prototypes to show them.
We have a founder in our group of startups in character labs at the moment. I'm thinking of Maruti,
John, who comes from doing sales at Rippling. And we had been talking to tons of customers while
starting off his company. And he said, you know, I had 50 conversations over the past month,
but I learned so much more from even the first conversation when I had a hypothesis and I had a
prototype or a couple prototypes to show them. It's like night and day. That is a great example.
This all makes sense. As you guys describe it, like you're actually testing something very
concrete that your entire team is aligned behind and actual prototypes and you've thought about
different directions. So it's you're testing something very specific versus just generally
testing at your general concept. As we go into the second design sprint for
Latchit, they're making some edits to their founding hypothesis now. They're, you know,
revising a few things, making new sketches, new proposals for what this solution might look like.
They've learned a lot in that first sprint, a new prototype that got a prototype that has more
detail now. So they are engineers. They're starting to actually write some code and put some more
detail behind the product. It's more robust. And again, they're trying to fix that positioning.
Here's their scorecard. And if you're watching on YouTube, you'll be able to see it. But again,
there's a lot of red here. At first blush, the scorecard is bleeding. But there are some promising
signs. There's like maybe a few little sunbreaks. There's some spots where some of the red has
started to flip to yellow. And so if we look at the conclusion on the far right, they're starting to
believe their differentiation is dialed in. And they're starting to believe that this could be
the right approach. They may be able to get people to choose it to the competition, even though
they haven't done it yet. So those are starting to become yellow lights on the scorecard.
And now they'll take what they've learned. And now we're into the third consecutive week of
design sprints. Again, they're going to sort of review that founding hypothesis. They're going to
sketch. They're recruiting a new slate of customers as they do each week. A new prototype,
again, more code in the prototype. It's becoming more and more robust, more realistic as they're
also adjusting the marketing and the positioning at the same time. So all of these things kind of
go in concert, the product itself and the marketing are sort of one as they're as they're moving along.
And this is an extreme example of everything is green. Everything's green. If you can't see
every single one is green. And this is this is extreme, but it is a pattern that we see this is
real again and again. This is a real example. Wow. How do I invest in this round? This is great.
Yeah, this is great. So we see this again and again. And I can share a couple of other
boards of ones that are in progress. We're also constantly adjusting the template so you can
get to see a little bit more how the how people will edit their their founding hypothesis from
sprint to sprint. So you know, mellow, who we were talking about, here's their first prototype.
And you know, here's their first scorecard. Lots of lots of yellow for them. Maybe they're a little
bit more likely to use yellow than red. And then here's the edits to their founding hypothesis
after the first sprint. So you can kind of see in red, they're changing, slightly changing the
definition of their target customer from the first week. It's slightly changing the problem that
they're solving, slightly changing the approach, slightly changing the competition. They've dialed
in. They've gotten more crisp on who are we up against? They've gotten a little bit more crisp,
just a tiny tweak on what how do we explain this to people to get them excited about it? What's the
differentiation? They sprint again, they prototype again. And if we just jump down and just looking at
hypotheses, they learn a bunch and out. There's another slight tweak to that founding hypothesis.
And so week after week, you're learning, but you're also really able to,
able to track exactly what is it that we learned and how does that affect our strategy?
Okay, guys, this was incredible. I think we've covered the entire process. I love that you also
covered the design sprint pieces, which isn't part of this book, but it's such a core. If
clearly these things are very connected and meant to work together. So you go from here's the
thing we should be building to actually test it. Let me ask you before we wrap up. Is there
anything else that you think is really important for people to know before they start trying this
process at home? And is there anything you can point them to to actually try this at home?
One thing we didn't talk about, we use an example of a company who's not building an AI first
product. Latchets building, you know, this networked community sales platform for artisans.
It'd probably be interesting to look at how people use this when they are building a very technical
product. When they're vibe coding prototypes, that's a question we're getting all the time.
What's the influence on this of the speed with which you can build something? That's an awesome idea.
Let's definitely do that. Okay, so let's jump in here and take a look at a company, again,
in our current group of labs teams. Actually, on Orbital, it's called, and the founder, Denny J,
is actually running this whole process solo, which is pretty cool too. He's a remarkable guy.
We have a couple of solo founders right now who are able to generate, you can see, just give
like a sneak peek. He's generating when we talk about customers, all these sticky notes himself
and making the decisions himself about which is the right one. But to ground us in this story,
his founding hypothesis is he wants to help geospatial devs solve these sort of complex workflows with
a browser-based no-code development environment. We'll take a look just really quickly at what his
prototypes look like. In the first week, I can show you this prototype right here. It's a marketing
page, and on this marketing page, there's a link to a video. So if I click find out more,
I'm going to see this video, and this video, we're going to kind of hear Denny J talking over it,
and it's going to kind of walk through a screen share of a very rudimentary version of what
this product might look like. Now, if you're watching on YouTube and you see this prototype,
you might think, boy, that marketing page and the demo itself,
pretty bare bones, not the most polished looking. This doesn't look super compelling.
So he was focusing in that first sprint on the messaging, on finding those people who actually
have that role, testing it with them, and he learned a lot. So if we go back to his scorecard,
we'll see, okay, that was a pretty good one. Actually, a lot of green on his first scorecard,
but he also felt like what he tested was pretty incomplete. Now, one thing that's cool here,
we saw the big leap with Latchit from one week to another in terms of their learnings in the
scorecards. One of the things that's interesting here is to go from Denny J's first prototype here
to his second prototype, and it's obvious he's been able to just build a ton in the next week.
And he's using AI-based tools. He's doing a lot of work. He's also just a terrific engineer,
but here we've got like a much more real looking marketing page, very detailed. And an important
thing that he's done here with this is he's built out a lot and created a video of something so
that the product, while not fully functional, you can see exactly how it works. So if we sort of
play this video, he's created this demonstration of what it looks like when you type in a query into
the engine and exactly the kinds of results you get. And by doing a combination of vibe coding,
real coding, all of which is based off of, you know, pencil sketches, we can go back and see the
sketches he's doing on paper to define, this is what I think needs to be in there to make this
compelling to deliver on my differentiation. And then he's using a product video so that the
entire thing doesn't have to work fully freeform. That's what it can look like when a team is
building something that's, you know, more AI-centric when it's a more sophisticated tool when people
are going to be curious about the sort of the ins and outs of it. So along those lines,
where do you find people are leveraging AI most in helping them through these sprints,
through either the foundation sprint or the design sprint? And mostly you just vibe coding prototypes.
That's definitely the first and biggest use of AI in sprint so far is making prototypes that
look more realistic faster. And, you know, it's kind of like having an entire prototyping team
on standby, right? So that you don't have to just make it yourself and sort of piece things together,
but you can have a ton of people ready to jump in, make something look really realistic.
But it's also really critical we found that while you're outsourcing that prototyping work,
you don't outsource the thinking. You don't kind of skip over the part where you think about,
well, what is the actual copy on the website? How do I actually describe what the product is? How
it's differentiated? And so it's one of the reasons why doing the foundation sprint first and then
doing a design sprint can really help you. And, you know, because it allows you to spend time working on
that harder part of what it means to design and build a product. And then once you have a
clear view of that, then you can use AI tools to go really fast. And, you know, in this example,
that Jake is showing of action and orbital, people get really clever about which parts of this need
to be real, which parts of this can be vibe coded, which parts of this can just be a static Figma mockup.
And it's all about kind of creating a simulation, something that looks realistic that you can put
in front of real customers to help you answer the key questions. That's a really good point
that you're making. And again, it's just a reminder, you will move faster if you slow down a little
bit at the beginning, that because prototyping is so easy now and just things that look, it's so
easy to make something that looks really nice and kind of doing what you want, but spending a
little time making sure you understand what you're testing and what you want becomes more important.
We had a couple of teams in this current group of character labs where they jumped to vibe coding
prototypes right away, at the very beginning. And when you generate something using an LLM,
using an AI tool, it looks pretty real. It looks believable. And so I think there's a temptation to
say like, okay, this is good to go. It looks close enough that I'm just going to show that to
customers. And then what they found was actually it was super generic. It didn't really describe
what the product was. It didn't really describe how it was different because it was generated by
a model that is trained on existing products. And so in that second sprint, that was when they
really took a step back and said, okay, let's think through this and then shift into prototyping mode.
So it's definitely helping people speed up, but we also think there's an important lesson here
that while you're outsourcing prototyping, don't outsource the thinking as well.
I see pulling something up, Jake, that might be. Yeah, I imagine you want to show.
Yeah, I think it's kind of interesting to see the sketches that went into Denny J's prototype,
the Axi and Orbital prototype that we just looked at, because they are super detailed. And
this is doing this level of thought where you're pausing, you're being really intentional about
what does the customer need to know, what needs to happen for them to find a solution to their
problem on, you know, and within the product. That's a way of doing your prompt engineering.
If you end up via coding this prototype, but you start off with a very clear plan about this is
what the thing needs to look at, look like, rather than going immediately into a conversational mode,
where you're sort of co-designing with the LLM and going back and forth via chat conversation,
this is much like clear to yield an opinionated product that makes sense that's very clearly
defined around the problem that you're trying to solve, the tasks that need to happen to solve
that problem, and the right messaging, the right wording, it's really crisply aligned with what
you know about your customers, what you know about what they care about. That's such a good point.
Again, just the concept of the primal mark is ringing in my head as you talk about this,
just as soon as you make that prototype, everything from that point is a response to that
first idea versus have I actually thought through what this should be. Guys, we did it. This is
incredible. I think this is going to help a lot of people think through and actually save a lot of
time. Is there anything else that you want to share, leave listeners with, maybe a last nugget
or something you want to, I don't know, just double down on to leave folks with before we wrap up?
Well, one quick thing is that we've shared a lot of examples in this conversation,
and we actually have a Miro template that folks can use if they want to run their own
foundation sprint. It's the template that we use. When we're working with founders,
taking them through these sprints, we do our work in Miro, even if we're in person with them,
we're usually working in Miro or maybe working on paper and then capturing it in Miro because
it's just such a great canvas to work on. We'll make that template available so anybody who's
who's listening or watching can grab that and use it to run their own foundation sprint.
That's amazing. You answered the question and asked that. I forgot to come back to you.
Can we give people a URL? We'll put in the show notes, but is it at your, yeah, I guess where can
folks find it? You should find it at character.vc and you can go there. We'll have a page for you
too. That is awesome. Obviously, you can also read the book and that goes through a lot of
this process, but I think the template is just like a plug-in plate. Let's just do this at home.
Obviously, if they want to go deeper, they can work with you guys. It's such a win. They take money.
You give them money and you help them figure out what they have to build. What a deal.
And that's also character.vc. They want to explore that. Yeah.
Amazing. Okay. Is there anything else Jake that you wanted to share before we close up?
Now, just, you know, if you made it this far, hopefully your mind and heart is open to this idea,
but we know it's a lot to ask to clear the calendar and follow these steps. But if
John and I weren't so convinced that beginnings are essential to getting your best efforts
in the hands of people and to achieving the things you want for your customers,
we wouldn't be doing this. We wouldn't be going to all the trouble. They're simpler things.
The kind of cool thing we've found about working in this way, though we've focused a lot on
finding product markets and building your business, getting started, getting momentum,
getting alignment, all these things that tactically are important, that business-wise are important.
But another part of it that's a nice side benefit that actually maybe is the most important
thing of all is how close it brings you to your customers to the people who you're building for
because you're interacting with them. You're focusing on them as you plan and you're interacting
with them on a weekly basis when you work in this way. And how close it brings teammates together.
In a very authentic way, we're working together on the most important things and we don't have to
navigate the usual social dynamics of conversations where one person has an idea and they're pitching it.
We don't have to navigate the constant context switches of the calendar that dominates our days.
We're just working on the most important thing and the structure takes care of a lot of the difficulty
of the process of what we should do and we just find people come out of it with renewed motivation,
renewed energy, and renewed enthusiasm around. The fact that they get to work on what actually matters
to them. Yeah, and it just feels like really fun, just this part of the process is so fun,
and then not having to decide how to approach it, having someone just give you here's a framework
to follow. It's like a yoga class, right? I don't know how to do yoga, but it's explained to me,
step by step. Yoga for startups, that'll be the title of this episode. Guys, this was awesome.
I'm going to skip the lighting around just because we've gone long and I guess just working
for explaining online and how can listeners be useful to you? You can find me on LinkedIn,
John, I think you find you on LinkedIn too. We'd love for people to apply to character labs,
or if you know a founder, apply to character labs, get in touch with us, character.vc.
There we go. All right, guys. Thank you so much for being here and for sharing.
Yeah, thanks, honey. Thanks, honey. Bye, everyone.
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show
on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating
or a leaving review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past
episodes or learn more about the show at Lenyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.